## AtlesDescriptives

Scripts designed to help undergraduates work with (and interpret) data produced by Atles.


## Background: Automated Behavioral Experiments with Zebrafish

I have had a long-standing interest in solving the problem of how we can provide undergraduates the opportunity to propose and conduct their own high-quality behavioral research at a small liberal arts school.  Historically, the Psychology Department at Illinois Wesleyan University has had a commitment to providing students with hands-on laboratory experiences. I've been working to expand these experiences by developing systems that allow individual undergraduate students to conduct high-quality, low-cost research with sufficiently large samples to to reliably detect moderate to small effects.  I have selected Zebrafish as a model organism since they are commonly used in neuroscience and psychopharmacological research and they are inexpensive to acquire and maintain in large numbers in the lab.    

The main product of this work, developed in collaboration with my colleague Mark Liffiton,  has been  [ATLeS, a low-cost open-source research system](https://github.com/liffiton/ATLeS) that (nearly) completely automates observational studies and studies of learning and conditioning with adult Zebrafish.  We began work in March 2014 and completed testing of our basic system in May of 2018. Our system offers real-time tracking so it can dynamically respond to fish behavior. Our system also offers automated data visualization and statistical analyses.  We have designed the system to be inexpensive (less than $100 per tracking box), modular (as many tracking boxes can be added to the system as your lab space allows),  and accessible to anyone (hardware can be built with off the shelf components.  Software is free for anyone to use or modify). Undergraduates have run a number of pilot studies with the system as we have been working toward finalizing the system.  

ATLeS allows undergraduates to run high-quality, large sample size studies of behavior in a very short-time frame. The speed of the system allows undergraduates to conduct research iteratively. We can complete studies (data collection and data analysis) with sample sizes three times as large at what is typically seen in the literature within two weeks. This allows undergraduates to conduct multiple studies per semester during which they can consider their findings and modify their methods. It allows us to detect and correct methodological issues very quickly.   ATLeS massively improves the behavioral research feedback loop by shrinking months of work down to days. 

Slides from a seminar describing the genesis of the project [are available here](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1_cvmcTCmpmDjmHe_X_WBaxf2H8GWcSOa79k-GFRz26Q/edit?usp=sharing).  More information about [the development of ATLeS is available here](https://sites.google.com/view/bradsheese-researchandteaching/home/atles?authuser=0).  If you want to make your own  ATLeS please see [our github repository](https://github.com/liffiton/ATLeS). 

A few representative end-products from ATLeS and other Zebrafish projects:

- Sheese, B. E., & Liffiton, M. (2017, September). [_ATLES: A high-throughput open source system for behavioral experiments with Zebrafish_](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1_cvmcTCmpmDjmHe_X_WBaxf2H8GWcSOa79k-GFRz26Q/edit?usp=sharing). Invited seminar for the School of Biological Sciences at Illinois State University, Normal, IL. 
- Loyet\*, C., Liffiton, M. & Sheese, B. E. (2016, May). [_Zebrafish response to contingent light stimuli during 30 and 60 minute training sessions_](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1aZ3qqk5xw7rkoaExRAQJX70ncD56DiHhRq60Z8MLYcM/edit?usp=sharing). Poster presented at the annual conference of the Association for Psychological Science, Chicago, IL.
- Henrikson\*, C. (2015). [_The impact of dexamethasone on behavioral development in larval Zebrafish (Danio rerio)_](https://digitalcommons.iwu.edu/psych_honproj/184/). Undergraduate honors thesis.
- Sheese, B. E., & Deharak, B. (2014, August). [_Inexpensive high-throughput computer-aided tracking of Zebrafish in the novel tank paradigm_](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1tcfpL-MLRU3JtDdTREX78_EFv5nNrUzZax9FGWlhVDA/edit?usp=sharing). Poster presentation at the annual conference of the American Psychological Association. Washington, DC.  
